KEP-4017: Pod Index Label for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs (#4019)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/4017-pod-index-label/README.md

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
  - [ ] e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]

> - [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

Author: done

Currently, StatefulSet pods do not have their pod index as a label or annotation, and
Indexed Jobs only set the pod completion index as an annotation.
This KEP proposes to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

StatefulSets, similar to Indexed Jobs, assign a pod ordinal to each of their pods (this is
analogous to the pod completion index for Indexed Jobs).

Indexed Jobs set the pod index as an annotation, which means it can be utilized by the downward API,
however, it cannot easily be used for selecting pods based on their index or filtering metrics/logs, 
or for doing things like routing network traffic to a pod with a specific index (e.g., index 0). 

StatefulSets include the pod index as part of the pod name. This means that the only way for a 

> StatefulSet pod to know its own index is to [parse the pod name](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_utils.go#L63-L75),

Author: makes sense, done

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1
As a user, I would like to lookup a job's pod logs by its index.

#### Story 2
As a user, I would like to target traffic to a specific pod index (e.g., index 0) in a StatefulSet.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> ## Design Details

Reviewer: One thing you may want to consider is what kind of validation do you want to perform on existing labels in pods?

I think it shouldn't be expected that users are setting k8 labels but maybe thing about some kind of validation to protect this or warn against it?  Validation is really difficult to make stricter so may be worth thinking about what kind of rules you want to put in place now.

change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->
The StatefulSet controller will only need a minor update to the [newStatefulSetPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/fb5e9ef3b2a6f2136d54868187431c345e59f55f/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_utils.go#L458) function, to set the pod ordinal as the label `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-index`. This call is downstream from the [newVersionedStatefulSetPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_control.go#L416) call, which generates
the StatefulSet pods before creating them as necessary in [CreateStatefulPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_control.go#L433).

Similarly, the Job controller would need to add the completion index as a label [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/job/job_controller.go#L1481)
where it adds the corresponding annotation.

> <<[UNRESOLVED how this change will interact with existing workloads]>>

Reviewer 2: I think this entire section should move up, to the risks/mitigations section, rather than here.

Author: done

This means for the user to utilize the label via the downward API, or to use the label for pod selection, they will need to recreate 
the StatefulSet so the label is present on all pods.

2. Inject the label only on pods for *newly created StatefulSets/Indexed Jobs*. We can track this by annotating newly created StatefulSets/Indexed Jobs 
to distinguish existing ones from newly created ones. Using this strategy, for a given StatefulSet/IndexedJob, either none of the pods have this label, or all 
of them do, which will provide a more consistent user experience. However, in the case of a cluster downgrade to a version without this feature, new pods 
would start getting created without this label again.

Both options will not be disruptive to existing workloads. Option 1 is more straightforward and does not risk locking us into adding this somewhat
hacky annotation to StatefulSets/Jobs indefinitely like Option 2 does. On the other hand, outside of the cluster downgrade edge case, Option 2 will
ensure consistency within a single StatefulSet/Indexed Job and therefore a more predictable user experience.

> After considering these trade-offs, I propose we move forward with Option 1 for simplicity and to avoid being stuck adding this annotation to 

Author: done

StatefulSets/Indexed Jobs. In addition, the downside of existing workloads having only a subset of pods with the new label will not cause any serious issues.

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*
The goal is to ensure that we don't accept enhancements with inadequate testing.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

> [ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to

Reviewer 2: :heavy_check_mark:

https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/controller/job`: `05/18/2023` - `90.4%`
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/controller/statefulset`: `05/18/2023` - `85.7%`

##### Integration tests

<!--
Integration tests are contained in k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration.
Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

The specific test cases will depend on which approach we pursue, as outlined in the Design Details section above.

> This section will be updated accordingly once we align on this.

Reviewer 2: I'd expect simple unit tests to ensure the labels are added, and integration tests to ensure that for existing jobs/statefulsets only new ones will get it (since that's what y'all are leaning towards).

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

No changes required to existing cluster to use this feature.

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

> N/A (this feature doesn't impact nodes).

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest adding a bit more information, why N/A. Something like:
this feature adds new labels to pods, which doesn't require coordination between various components of the control-plane. In the worst case where a n-1 kube-controller-manager will be creating pods it will create pods w/o the label, and new k-c-m will create with. 
Something like that.

Author: done

are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->
We plan to add unit and integration tests. 

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

It will not impact already running workloads.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> N/A

Author: done

and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [X] API .metadata
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
    - `.metadata.labels['statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-index']` for StatefulSets
    - `.metadata.labels['batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index']` for Indexed Jobs
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

> N/A

Reviewer 2: See above about metrics.

Author: added

  - estimated throughput
  - originating component(s) (e.g. Kubelet, Feature-X-controller)
Focusing mostly on:
  - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
  - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes resources
    (e.g. update of object X triggers new updates of object Y)
  - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
    heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type
  - Supported number of objects per cluster
  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - Which API(s):
  - Estimated increase:
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type(s):
  - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->

> New pod label of size 34B plus value of size N where N is the number of digits in the pod ordinal.

Reviewer 2: What's the worst case for N?

Author: Worst case for N would be the max number of pods per node * max number of nodes. So according to these docs on [large clusters](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/best-practices/cluster-large/#:~:text=More%20specifically%2C%20Kubernetes%20is%20designed,more%20than%20150%2C000%20total%20pods) this would be 110 pods/node * 5000 nodes = 550,000 (6 digits).

So max label size would be 34 + 6 = 40B.

filtered by pod index, for both StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
- Set pod index as label on pods for StatefulSet/Indexed Jobs.
- Adding the label should not be disruptive to existing workloads.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
At a high level, the proposal is to modify the StatefulSet and Job controllers to set the pod index
as a pod label at pod creation time (for jobs, this would only apply to jobs in
Indexed completion mode). The details of this are outlined in the Design Details section below.

StatefulSet pod label: `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-index`

> Indexed Job pod label: `batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index` (same as existing annotation)

Reviewer 2: This doesn't have to block the KEP, we can move with this as is, and we can update once we reach consensus during api review. Separately I'll start a thread on slack about it.

> Indexed Job pod label: `batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index` (same as existing annotation)

Reviewer 3: Why not use the same label on both types?  In other words, kubernetes defines the name and meaning, controllers can choose to implement it.

> Indexed Job pod label: `batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index` (same as existing annotation)

Reviewer 4: slack thread for the record https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C18NZM5K9/p1685446380451619?thread_ts=1685446327.941769&cid=C18NZM5K9

@thockin would appreciate your feedback

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1
As a user, I would like to lookup a job's pod logs by its index.

#### Story 2

> As a user, I would like to target traffic to a specific pod index (e.g., index 0) in a StatefulSet.

Reviewer 4: Also for Indexed Job. In particular, for architectures where all workers connect to a single head pod.

Instead of creating a Service that matches the entire Job, you can create a Service that matches only the head Pod, which would be more performant, specially with a high number of workers. Performance should be part of the motivation.

Also, please make sure to update this doc https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/job/job-with-pod-to-pod-communication/ to list this pattern

Author: Good point, updated story 2 to include this.

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->
Currently, StatefulSet pods do not have their pod index as a label or annotation, and
Indexed Jobs only set the pod completion index as an annotation.

> This KEP proposes to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

Reviewer 5: Initial discussion and thoughts from @smarterclayton at https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/117986

> This KEP proposes to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

Reviewer 3: I think I am fine with it if:

1) it's always prefixed
2) the docs are clear that it is managed by the workload controller(s), and it is NOT guaranteed for every pod
3) the docs are clear about what happens if two pods get the same value (it is set by workload controllers, nothing in the API system will prevent collisions from happening)

It is important to note that there are things out that which recalculate things when labels change, but it seems like this won't be changing in real time.

I wonder if we really want something like labels but non-mutable after creation?

> This KEP proposes to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

Reviewer 6: Thanks Tim - I agree with that.

@danielvegamyhre - can you please add (2) and (3) explicitly to beta graduation criteria

> This KEP proposes to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

Author: Added

would start getting created without this label again.

3. Inject the label on *all pods* (pods existing prior to feature enablement and pods created after feature enablement). However, retroactively modifying pods of existing workloads would risk being too disruptive to existing workloads which may have logic depending on pod
labels, so this option should not be considered.

Both options 1 and 2 will not be disruptive to existing workloads. Option 1 is more straightforward and does not risk locking us into adding this somewhat
hacky annotation to StatefulSets/Jobs indefinitely like Option 2 does. On the other hand, outside of the cluster downgrade edge case, Option 2 will
ensure consistency within a single StatefulSet/Indexed Job and therefore a more predictable user experience.

After considering these trade-offs, I propose we move forward with Option 1 for simplicity and to avoid being stuck adding this annotation to 
StatefulSets/Indexed Jobs. In addition, the downside of existing workloads having only a subset of pods with the new label will not cause any serious issues.

> <<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

Reviewer 5: I think we converged on option 1 already.

> <<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

Author: Yes, we converged on option 1, on lines 306-307 I mention this but I forgot to remove the UNRESOLVED tags, sorry about that. I have removed the unresolved tags now.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

Unit tests will ensure the new label is correctly added to pods, and
integration tests will verify that the label is only added to pods from newly created StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs, not existing workloads. 

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

E2E tests will not provide any additional coverage that isn't already covered by unit + integration tests, 
since we are simply adding a label, so no e2e tests will be necessary for this change.

### Graduation Criteria

We will release the feature directly in Beta state since there is no benefit in having an alpha release, since we are simply adding a new label so there is very little risk (unlike removing an

> existing label which other things may depend on, for example).

Reviewer 6: @soltysh - so that you can shout that you disagree :)

> existing label which other things may depend on, for example).

Reviewer 5: Assuming we converge on option 1, I feel that starting from alpha will give us very little benefit and doesn't change the tradeoffs that option offers.

> existing label which other things may depend on, for example).

Reviewer 6: Unless we consider rethinking our choice there.

But Ok - I buy the point that we won't get much feedback fro Alpha and it won't give us enough data to reconsider it, so I'm fine with starting with Beta.

> existing label which other things may depend on, for example).

Author: Sounds good, the KEP outlines the plan to start with beta - let me know if anything else is needed.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->
The feature can be safely rolled back.

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: PodIndexLabel

>   - Components depending on the feature gate:

Reviewer 6: ping

>   - Components depending on the feature gate:

Author: Updated

-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

It will not impact already running workloads.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->
- Users can monitor queue related metrics (e.g., queue depth and work duration) to make sure they aren't growing.
- For Indexed Jobs, users can also monitor `job_sync_duration_seconds`.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

> It will be tested manually prior to beta launch.

Reviewer 6: Please ensure that it will happen and the test itself and findings are documented in this KEP before setting the FG to Beta in k/k.

@soltysh - can you please ensure that it happens?

- [X] API .metadata
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
    - `.metadata.labels['statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-index']` for StatefulSets
    - `.metadata.labels['batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index']` for Indexed Jobs
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next question.
-->
- 99% percentile over day for Job syncs is <= 15s for a client-side 50 QPS
  limit.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

> - [] Metrics

Reviewer 6: Please fill in - the SLI is more important than SLO itself

Author: added

Focusing mostly on:
  - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
  - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes resources
    (e.g. update of object X triggers new updates of object Y)
  - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
    heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type
  - Supported number of objects per cluster
  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - Which API(s):
  - Estimated increase:
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type(s):
  - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->
New pod label of size 34B plus value of size N where N is the number of digits in the pod ordinal. 

> Worst case for N would be the max number of pods per node * max number of nodes. Per the docs on [large clusters](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/best-practices/cluster-large/) this would be 110 pods/node * 5000 nodes = 550,000 (6 digits).

Reviewer 6: nit: we officially suport 150,000 pods/cluster (it's mentioned there too)

Author: Updated

To address these issues, we propose to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and
Indexed Jobs.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
- Set pod index as label on pods for StatefulSet/Indexed Jobs.
- Adding the label can't be disruptive to existing workloads.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
At a high level, the proposal is to modify the StatefulSet and Job controllers to set the pod index/ordinal
as a label on the pod at pod creation time. For Jobs, this would only apply to jobs in
Indexed completion mode. The details of this are outlined in the Design Details section below.

> StatefulSet pod label: `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-ordinal`

Reviewer: This may be worth asking in sig-apps as I remember there was some discussion about this in a previous meeting.  

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/api/apps/v1beta1/types.go#L29

Looks to use `statefulset.kubernetes.io` but we used `batch.kubernetes.io` in batch as there was already an existing label.

> StatefulSet pod label: `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-ordinal`

Reviewer 5: Thanks, then we should continue to use `statefulset.kubernetes.io`

> StatefulSet pod label: `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-ordinal`

Author: makes sense, done.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->
Currently, StatefulSet pods do not have their pod index as a label or annotation, and
Indexed Jobs only set the pod completion index as an annotation.
This KEP proposes to set the pod index as a label on pods for StatefulSets and Indexed Jobs.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

StatefulSets, similar to Indexed Jobs, assign a pod ordinal to each of their pods (this is
analogous to the pod completion index for Indexed Jobs).

> Indexed Jobs set the pod index as an annotation, which means it can be utilized by the downard API,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexed Jobs set the pod index as an annotation, which means it can be utilized by the downward API,
```

Author: done

> they do not have it set as a annotation. This means that the only way for the StatefulSet pod to know its own index is

Author: Makes sense - I rewrote this section to improve the clarity, let me know if you have any additional thoughts.

and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
At a high level, the proposal is to modify the StatefulSet and Job controllers to set the pod index
as a pod label at pod creation time (for jobs, this would only apply to jobs in
Indexed completion mode). The details of this are outlined in the Design Details section below.

StatefulSet pod label: `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-ordinal`
Indexed Job pod label: `batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index` (same as existing annotation)

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

> #### Story 1

Reviewer: Is it possible to do any of these stories yet?  They aren't really mentioned in the motivation as reasons why you would need this feature to enable stories like this?

Author: User story 1 is mentioned in the motivation section. User story 2 isn't, but I can add it to the motivation section as well.

As a user, I would like to lookup a job's pod logs by its index.

#### Story 2

> As a user, I would like to target traffic to a specific pod in a StatefulSet.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As a user, I would like to target traffic to a specific pod index (e.g., index 0) in a StatefulSet.
```

change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->
The StatefulSet controller will only need a minor update to the [newStatefulSetPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/fb5e9ef3b2a6f2136d54868187431c345e59f55f/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_utils.go#L458) function, to set the pod ordinal as the label `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-ordinal`. This call is downstream from the [newVersionedStatefulSetPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_control.go#L416) call, which generates
the StatefulSet pods before creating them as necessary in [CreateStatefulPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_set_control.go#L433).

Similarly, the Job controller would need to add the completion index as a label [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/job/job_controller.go#L1481)
where it adds the corresponding annotation.

> Next, we must determine how enabled this new feature will interact with existing workloads. There are a couple of options:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Next, we must determine how enabling this new feature will interact with existing workloads. There are a couple of options:
```

> 1. Only inject the label on *newly created pods*, so an existing StatefulSet/Indexed Jobs may include pods with the label and some without it. 

Reviewer: I was told that when you have unresolved items it sometimes recommended to wrap them like this?

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```
It sounds like you are asking the reviewers to decide on design 1 or design 2 so you may want to make it clear that this is still a question?

Author: Added! thanks for the tip

> This means for the user to utilize the label via the downard API, or to use the label for pod selection, they will need to recreate 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means for the user to utilize the label via the downward API, or to use the label for pod selection, they will need to recreate 
```

Author: thanks, done. not sure why `./hack/verify-spelling.sh` didn't catch this

the StatefulSet so the label is present on all pods.

2. Inject the label only on pods for *newly created StatefulSets/Indexed Jobs*. We can track this by annotating StatefulSets/Indexed Jobs. This way,
for a given StatefulSet/IndexedJob, either none of the pods have this label, or all of them do, which will provide a more consistent
user experience. However, in the case of a cluster downgrade to a version without this feature, new pods would start getting
created without this label again.

Both options will not be disruptive to existing workloads, however, I lean towards option 2 so outside of the cluster downgrade edge case,

> there will be consistency within a single StatefulSet/Indexed Job and therefore a more predictable user experience.

Reviewer 5: adding an annotation is hacky though and it will carry no meaning in the future, but we may be stuck with it because it kinda become part of the api. I would go with option 1 for simplicity.

Author: Discussed this offline and updated the recommendation accordingly

-->

[ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

> - `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

Reviewer: I would fill this out.  It seems like you have a good idea of what code you would modify so you could fill this out.

Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

The specific test cases will depend on which approach we pursue, as outlined in the Design Details section above.
This section will be updated accordingly once we align on this.

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

> - <test>: <link to test coverage>

Reviewer: Since you are going with beta as your first release, would you need to consider in more detail what kind of e2e tests you will add?

Author: Honestly I don't think an e2e test will provide any additional coverage that isn't already covered by unit+integration tests, since we are simply adding a label. So unless it's required, I was going to suggest we forego adding a new e2e test for this label. What do you think?

Reviewer: I'm mostly learning what all these fields mean.  I just see in the comments that there is usually more requirements for Beta as opposed to Alpha.  So not exactly sure in this case.

Author: I see, yeah I discussed with ahg-g@ offline and we agreed e2e test is not necessary since it isn't providing any additional coverage, but I updated this section explaining this reasoning for clarity.

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->
N/A

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->
- Check if StatefulSet pods have the label `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-ordinal`.
- Check if Indexed Job pods have the label `batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index`.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 

> - [X] API .status

Author: thanks, updated

-->
No.

### Scalability

<!--
For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them.

For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API call type (e.g. PATCH pods)
  - estimated throughput
  - originating component(s) (e.g. Kubelet, Feature-X-controller)
Focusing mostly on:
  - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
  - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes resources
    (e.g. update of object X triggers new updates of object Y)
  - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
    heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
-->
No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type
  - Supported number of objects per cluster
  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->

> No.

Reviewer: I think the answer is yes.  You will be adding new labels to statefulset and indexed jobs.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, [feature gate] graduations, or as
something else. The KEP should keep this high-level with a focus on what
signals will be looked at to determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

> #### Alpha

Author: quick question, why do propose we use the same feature flag as we used for the Pod Scheduling Readiness feature? Is it since this new feature (adding a new label) is not large enough to warrant the overhead associated with creating a new feature flag?

> #### Alpha

Reviewer 5: copy paste error, I copied this from the KEP I sent for mutable pod scheduling directives :)

> #### Alpha

Author: ah ok, updated feature gate accordingly.

GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?

> -->

Reviewer 5: just say:
"No changes required to existing cluster to use this feature."

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.

> -->

Reviewer 5: say "N/A. This feature doesn't impact nodes."

  - Feature gate name: PodIndexLabel
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->
No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->
Yes. If the feature gate is disabled, the StatefulSet/Job controller will not add the
pod index as a label.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> The StatefulSet/Job controller will begin adding the pod index as a label to any
> pods being created, and existing pods will be unaffected.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The StatefulSet/Job controller will begin adding the pod index as a label to
pods created while the feature is enabled, and existing pods will be unaffected.
```

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

> N/A

Reviewer 5: say we plan to add integration test

Author: woops, not sure why I put N/A there. thanks

is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->
The feature can be safely rolled back.

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: PodIndexLabel
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - StatefulSet controller

>     - Job controller

Reviewer 6: Replace those two with "kube-controller-manager"

[We're rather asking about the binary-level components, as this is the level at which you set FGs]

Author: done

- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

> Yes - when we start setting a new label, if someone is doing deep-equal comparison, those will start failing.

Reviewer 6: nit: Let's simply switch to

Yes. New label is added to pods created for StatefulSet (statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-index) and Indexed Jobs (batch.kubernetes.io/job-completion-index)

Author: done

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->
Yes. If the feature gate is disabled, the StatefulSet/Job controller will not add the

> pod index as a label.

Reviewer 6: Please add: "Already existing pods will not be modified."

Author: done

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The StatefulSet/Job controller will begin adding the pod index as a label to
pods created while the feature is enabled, and existing pods will be unaffected.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

> We plan to add unit and integration tests. 

Reviewer 6: FWIW - enablement/disablement tests are not tests that are exercising the feature. They rather test "the transition of the feature-gate" [so they switch the value of the FG in the middle of the test].

Given the nature of this feature (it only adds a label for *newly created* pods, enablement/disablement tests don't much value.

So based on the comment above, I suggest changing to:

Given that this feature doesn't introduce any new API field, enablement/disablement tests will not provide reasonable value and won't be added.

Author: done

  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next question.
-->
- Jobs: 99% percentile over day for Job syncs is <= 15s for a client-side 50 QPS
  limit.
- StatefulSets: the ratio of `kube_statefulset_status_replicas`/`kube_statefulset_replicas` should be near 1.0, although as unhealthy replicas are often an application error rather than a problem with the stateful set controller, this will need to be tuned by an operator on a per-cluster basis.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->
Jobs:
  - Metric name: `job_sync_duration_seconds`, `job_sync_total`.
  - Components exposing the metric: `kube-controller-manager`

StatefulSets:
  - Metric name: `statefulset_reconcile_delay`
    - [Optional] Aggregation method: `quantile`

>     - Components exposing the metric: `pkg/controller/statefulset`

Reviewer 6: kube-controller-manager

Reviewer 6: Same in other places below.

Author: done

[supported limits].

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
-->
No.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

<!--
Focus not just on happy cases, but primarily on more pathological cases
(e.g. probes taking a minute instead of milliseconds, failed pods consuming resources, etc.).
If any of the resources can be exhausted, how this is mitigated with the existing limits
(e.g. pods per node) or new limits added by this KEP?

Are there any tests that were run/should be run to understand performance characteristics better
and validate the declared limits?
-->
No.

### Troubleshooting

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

> N/A

Reviewer 6: nit: remove

Author: done

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

> N/A

Reviewer 6: Let's switch to: "Pods cannot be created, this feature doesn't change it though".

[or sth like that]
